Aim: How do we explain the word digital with a live demonstration?

Intro:
We hear people talk about digital literacy. You may have heard that
digital camera has mostly displaced film camera from the market. Nowaday,
one would be hard-pressed to find a place where a film can be developed.
The term digital technology is used frequently, but what does the word digital mean?

Quick Turn & Talk:
What do you think digital is? Possible suggestiosn:
digital means advanced technology, computer, electronics.

Today we will examine the meaning of digital with an example from arduino.
As we look at arduino and computer programming, we do so with the focus on
understanding meaning of digital with a concrete example.

We will go to www.tinkercad.com to create a new circuit. Click on Circuits button on the left side.
In the new circuit page, click on Components Basic button to open Starter Arduino.
In the Arduino examples, choose the Blink example.

Click on Code and then click on text.

In any arduino program, there are two sections, just like an essay having three paragraphs.
In the first section called Setup(), the Arduino microcoontroller will carry out the
instruction in the setup at the beginning. After the setup's instructions have been carried out,
the Arduino microcontroller will perform the instructions in the loop() repeatedly.

In this example, Setup() has only one instruction, which informs Arduino to use pin 13 as an output pin.
Arduino uses output pin to send information to the outside world. In the loop() section, you see
that digitalWrite() function turns on the LED by setting the digital pin 13 HIGH (which means 1).
delay(1000); instruction tells the Arduino to not do anything new for 1000 millisecond which is
also 1 second. The next two instructions tell Arduino to turn off the LED by setting the digital pin 13 LOW (which
means 0) and again do nothing new for one second. The arduino will repeat this block of instruction indefinitely.
Click on Start Simulate button to run the computer program on the arduino microcontroller.

Q for you to consider in your small group: How does the blink example in Arduino demonstrate digital physically?

After a small group discussion, have students share their thoughts on how Arduino example shows what digital means.

Q: Things students can tinker with is how to change duration of delays.
Extension: possible science experiment on human sensory capability.

Activity: Use the blink as an example, students use the template to build their copy of blink program.
Extension: They can also make a variation of blink program.

Activity (med level): For deeper understanding, examine how a breadboard connects various sockets (holes)?

Q (advanced level): For advanced students, build an actual physical arduino that does the same thing as the blink example
   shown in tinkercad.com

Summary:

Ask groups to share their products from their activities.

When people talk about digital technology, what does the word digital really means?
Can you explain how Today's computer programming illustrates the meaning of digital in a physical way?






